8 of July 2020 T 1356
Chris Baber


"Introduction
The complexity of human movement arises from the balancing of consistency and variability in solving the Degrees of Freedom problem (Bernstein, xx). Each joint can be moved in more than one plane, leading to many possible combinations which need to be reduced into order to perform a control action (Newell, xx). However, too much reduction can result in highly consistent movement which lacks sufficient variability to allow adaptation to situational demands. Consequently, one can see much variability in human movement even the simplest of movements.  Variability can be beneficial in supporting adaptability and can reflect experience and expertise of the performance, e.g., in cycling.  Uncontrolled variability, due to disease, disfunction or inexperience, can be detrimental to performance and plays a role in detection of pathologies. While the analysis of movement of variability is becoming increasingly popular as a diagnostic tool, there remain challenges in terms of defining the most appropriate methods and parameters to apply. In part, these challenges stem from the fact that the identification movement variability requires analysis of signals which are time-series of 1-dimension in R which are noisy, nonlinear and non-stationary.  Further problems arise from assigning a plausible locus of control to the movements, e.g., in order to determine whether variability is the result of deliberative control by the performer or whether it arises from exogenous or endogenous disturbances.  For this paper, our focus is on the analysis of signals; specifically, in terms of objectively quantifying variability of lower dimension signals using time-series analysis.
Methods for time-series analysis generally involve the estimation of embedding parameters (m embedding dimension and  embedding delay) which are used to reconstruct the n-dimensional state space of the 1-dimension time-series.  Key to the selection of these parameters is the need to ensure that the topological properties of the (unknown) M-dimensional state space.   A popular approach to the construction of these state spaces involves the use of Recurrence Plots (RPs) which provide a graphical two-dimensional map (using black and white dots) to indicate recurring patterns in the n-dimensional system.  While RPs provide a human interpretable picture of the system, these require further analysis to allow the properties of that system to be quantified, and so Recurrence Quantification Analysis (RQA) can be applied.  However, the estimation of the embedding parameters for RQA remains an open problem (Bradley et al., 2015).
There is no agreed method for estimating embedding parameters (for RQA or for other nonlinear analysis methods) because time-series are system-dependent, i.e., these rely on the initial conditions, and on the configuration and behaviour of the system.  This means that, unless one holds all of the influencing variables constant, embedding parameters computed for one instance may not apply to another instance.   One could apply methods, such as autocorrelation, mutual information, nearest neighbour (and we will apply these in this paper), but these methods assume that the data are well sampled, with little noise and (usually) that the signals are purely deterministic.  As such, these methods can break-down in the face of real-world datasets which could have different length, different degrees of precision, or different levels of contamination from exogenous and endogenous sources of ‘noise’.  What is, perhaps, surprising is that even subject to these problems, the methods are useful and nonlinear dynamics approaches continue to tell us much about human movement.
For this paper, we explore the role of RP and RQA in the analysis of simple human movement.  We compare horizontal and vertical arm movements performed by neurotypical participants who are copying these movements being made by a humanoid robot.  This provides an initial point of comparison (between human movement, which we assume to have a degree of variability, and the robot, which we assume to have a degree of consistency).   Additionally, our interest lies in the estimation of embedding parameters in light of different features of the data, e.g., levels of smoothing, window length, structure of time-series based on movement, types of sensors, individual differences between participants and the movements that they perform. Specifically, we ask what are the effects of different embedding parameters, recurrence thresholds and characteristics of time-series on nonlinear analysis methods (i.e., reconstructed state space with uniform time-delay embedding, Recurrence Plots and Recurrence Quantification Analysis)?

Results
Reconstructed State Spaces
As noted in the Introduction, a challenge in the implantation of uniform time-delay embedding arises from the selection of embedding parameters because of the uniqueness of each time series in terms of its structure (e.g., modulation of amplitude, frequency, phase etc.). With that in mind, the options are to either calculate embedding parameters for each unique instance (which can make comparison challenging) or to find parameters which can apply to all instances in the study.  We recognise that the latter approach is not without its problems, but our approach is to compute sample mean over all values in each of the conditions of the time series for minimum dimension and minimum delay values.

Minimum embedding parameters
Minimum embedding parameters were initially computed using False Nearest Neighbour (FNN) and Average Mutual Information (AMI).   We used FNN to calculate a value for m and AMI to calculate a value for . Comment: You should provide a sentence here to justify the use these different methods for m and  To illustrate this, figure (A) show box plots for minimum embedding values for sensors on the wrist of the human (HS01) and the robot (RS01).   As we had assumed, minimum embedding values for HS01 show greater variation than those for RS01 (as indicated by differences in interquartile ranges).  Additionally, figure (A) show a decrease in mean values (rhombus) in the box plots as smoothness of the time-series increases (see sg0, sg1, sg2).  Figure (B) show box plots for Average Mutual Information (AMI).  One can see that, in contrast to RS01, minimum values for HS01 tend to spread as the smoothness of the time-series increases.
The sample mean for minimum value of embedding parameter, m derived from FNN  (figures A) is 6 and   from AMI (figures B) is 8.

Uniform Time-delay embedding
Using the minimum embedding parameters (defined above), the first three axis of the rotated Principal Components Analysis (PCA) are shown for the reconstructed state spaces of horizontal (figures  ) and vertical (figures ) arm movements.   While visual inspection of these figures suggests differences in the trajectories of the reconstructed state spaces, we require an objective quantification to determine the extent of the differences.  One approach could be use Euclidean distances from the origin for points in these trajectories, but this proved inconclusive and was not able to capture the dynamics of the trajectories. Consequently, we applied RP and RQA.

Recurrence Plots
Using the minimum embedding parameters and a recurrence threshold of 1 Comment: you should explain why you chose 1 here Recurrence Plots (RP) were computed for horizontal (figures ) and vertical (figures ) arm movements.

Recurrence Quantification Analysis
Four Recurrence Quantification Analysis metrics (percentage recurrence, REC, representing the percentage of black dots in RP; percentage determinism, DET, representing the predictability of the RP; ratio of DET / REC, RATIO; Shannon entropy, ENTR) were computed using the same parameters as for RP.

REC values
Figure (A) presents box plots of REC which show that REC values, for HS01, are more spread for Slow (i.e., 5 seconds per movement) movements in Horizontal (HS) or Vertical (VS) than for Fast (i.e., 2 seconds per movement).  This suggests greater variation between participants for the Slow movements.  For RS01, there is little variation between Slow and Fast movement.  In terms of smoothness, there seems little effect of HS01 but RS01 values do show affects of smoothness.

DET values
Figure (b) presents DET values and shows little difference for type of movement or performer.  However, DET values are affected by changes in smoothness of the signal, particularly for Fast movement.

RATIO values
Figure (C) presents the ratio of DET / REC.  These values, for the human performer, vary less for HN than for HF movement.  Additionally, smoothness leads to a decrease in mean values for Fast movements.

ENTR values
Figure (d) shows ENTR values are higher for the human performer than the robot, and vary with the smoothness of the time-series.

3D RQA ENTR
As ENTR appeared to be have higher sensitivity than the other measures, we explored the impact of different embedding parameters {m…}, {…} incrementing by 1 each run, with recurrence thresholds e = 1,2,3 and levels of smoothness (sg0, sg1, sg2).  Figure ( ) shows that increasing recurrence threshold leads to an increase in ENTR regardless of level of smoothness.  Increasing level of smoothness will also increase ENTR (figure () ).  In terms of movement or performer, RQA ENTR decrease from Slow (HS, VS) to Fast (HF, VF) for both human and robot.   In terms of individual differences, for human participants, figure ( ) compares p01, p02 and p03 (for illustrative purposes) – both between each other and in comparison with the more consistent performance of the robot.  In terms of window length (w100 (2s), w250 (5s), w500(10s), w750 (15s)), figure ( ) shows that improvement in capture with number of samples, although this has less of an effect on RQA ENTR.

Discussion
While there are many approaches to estimating embedding parameters for nonlinear analysis, these can be influenced by the structure of the time-series data.   We show that, for RSS, RP and RQA, the estimation of embedding parameters can be performed using a sample mean which, together with recurrence threshold, can be shown to be influenced by activity, performer, window length and smoothness of time-series.  It is known that time-series from different sources and with different characteristics require different embedding parameters, and this can produce different RPs.  We have shown how RQA metrics can help to quantify movement variability.

Conclusions
In this paper we show how the selection of nonlinear analysis metric (i.e., RSS, RP, RQA metrics) depends on what question one wishes to address with time-series data (e.g., predictability, organisation, dynamics, complexity).  Time-series data characteristics (e.g., window length, smoothness), time-series structure (e.g., frequency, amplitude) and data source (e.g., sensor placement, performance, movement) all influence the results. That said, it has been shown that the use of different characteristics of the data and their collection can help us visualise and quantify variability of movement using methods of nonlinear analysis.   There remain limitations of nonlinear methods in relation to the estimation of parameters (e.g., recurrence threshold, embedding parameters) which reflect the dynamics of specific movement and performers, window length and structure of the time-series.  We note that RQA DET seems to show low sensitivity to these differences, whereas REC and RATIO (primarily as a result of REC) show variation across performers and movements.   RQA ENTR, with different recurrence thresholds, can quantify variation in the time-series data and offers the most appropriate means for analysing variability in movement to allow us to analyse individual differences between human performers.  This metric could be applied to analyse human participants who might vary in age, state of health, anthropometric features and capability to perform movement."

Perhaps you could replace your text with mine?  I think that the methods etc. look OK (although still believe that there needs to be a bit more information in your description of the experiment, in terms of what participants had to do and in terms of the data collection)


